Add Onboarding Task page (#316)
NUbots/NUbook: src/book/03-guides/01-main-codebase/07-onboarding-task.mdx

title: Onboarding Task
description: Build a simple NUClear program to get comfortable with Git and the NUbots codebase.
slug: /guides/main/onboarding
authors:
  - Thomas O'Brien (@Tom0Brien)
  - Johanne Montano (@JohanneMontano)
  - Dexter Konijn (@dex-k)
---

The onboarding task aims to teach new members about [NUClear](https://nuclear.readthedocs.io/en/latest/). New members will be asked to engage in coding with C++. Prerequisites such as Git, VS code, etc. must be set up first before moving forward with this task. See the [Getting Started](guides/main/getting-started#page-content) page for more details.

## Terminology

### Role

A **Role** is a file that defines the desired purpose or functionality of the binary/program we want to compile. A role file lists what modules we want included in our program/binary.

This is an example of a role file:

```make
nuclear_role(
  extension::FileWatcher
  support::logging::ConsoleLogHandler
  actuation::KinematicsConfiguration
  platform::${SUBCONTROLLER}::HardwareIO
  input::SensorFilter
  extension::Director
  actuation::Kinematics
  actuation::Servos
  onboarding::Ping
  onboarding::Pong
  onboarding::Judge
)
```

### Messages

> A message is called a neutron. It is essentially a `.proto` file. When a role is built, the proto file becomes imported as a `.hpp` file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A message is called a neutron. It is essentially a `.proto` file. The proto file is compiled into C++,  and so it is imported as a `.hpp` C++ header file.
```
I don't know if this is too much info but the existing words seemed to dance around this and didn't make much sense to me.

Reviewer: or alternatively 
```suggestion
A message is called a neutron. It is essentially a `.proto` file. When a role is built, the proto file is compiled into C++,  and so it is imported as a `.hpp` C++ header file.
```

            emit(ping_msg);
        });
    }

}  // namespace module::onboarding
```

Let's dive into what's going on within this module:

1.  At the top of a module, we include the necessary header and message files:

    ```cpp
    #include "Ping.hpp"

    #include "extension/Configuration.hpp"

    #include "message/onboarding/Ping.hpp"
    #include "message/onboarding/Pong.hpp"
    ```

2.  Next, the module is defined as a class that inherits from the NUClear environment. It is essentially the module itself:

    ```cpp
    namespace module::onboarding {

        using extension::Configuration;

        Ping::Ping(std::unique_ptr<NUClear::Environment> environment) : Reactor(std::move(environment)) {

            using message::onboarding::Ping;
            using message::onboarding::Pong;
    ```

3.  Within the Pong module are the `on` functions that were mentioned earlier:

    ```cpp
    on<Configuration>("Ping.yaml").then([this](const Configuration& config) {
        // Use configuration here from file Ping.yaml
        this->log_level = config["log_level"].as<NUClear::LogLevel>();
    });

    on<Startup>().then([this] {
        // Vibe

>     });

Reviewer: This wasn't in the full snippit above but is here - which is in the branch?

        auto ping_msg = std::make_unique<Ping>();
        log<NUClear::INFO>("Ping");
        emit(ping_msg);
    });
    ```

    - `on<Configuration>` is used to load in configuration values from file `Pong.yaml`
    - `on<Startup>()` runs just once when the module starts
    - `on<Trigger<Ping>>()` runs when `Ping` message is received and prints "Ping"

<Alert type='info'>

The `log<NUClear::INFO>("Ping");` can be thought of as the equivalent of an `std::cout` in normal C++ or a `print` in python. There are various types that can be used for logging information. See NUbook for more information.

</Alert>

## Task: Git Branching

A branch is your own workspace where you can make changes and implement new features. It is a good practice to create a new branch for each new feature you are working on. This way, you can work on multiple features at the same time without affecting the main codebase.

1.  Open a terminal in your `NUbots` directory and checkout the branch `montano/onboarding` by running

    ```bash
    git checkout montano/onboarding
    ```

    This branch has a role `onboarding.role` and module `Ping` already created for you.

> 2.  Now crate your own branch which extends from this by running

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2.  Now create your own branch which extends from this by running
```

    ```bash
    git checkout -b <your-last-name>/branching-task
    ```

<Alert type='info'>

Don't be afraid to break things in your own branch! It will not directly impact the `main` branch.

</Alert>

### VSCode Git Extension

> There exists many GUI tools for using Git which can make your life easier, for example VSCode, Github Desktop or Git Kraken.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There exists many GUI tools for using Git which can make your life easier, for example VS Code, Github Desktop or GitKraken.
```

> In VScode, you can create your own branch by clicking on the button on the bottom left hand side, which is the name of the branch that you are currently on.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In VS Code, you can create your own branch by clicking on the button on the bottom left hand side, which is the name of the branch that you are currently on.
```

> To create a new branch using the VSCode Git extension:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To create a new branch using the VS Code Git extension:
```

1.  Click on the button in the bottom left hand corner of the screen containing the name of the current branch.

    If you have correctly done the git checkout command, then you should be in the `montano/onboarding` branch.

2.  Select `Create new branch from...` and enter `montano/onboarding`. This will create a new branch starting from the `montano/onboarding` branch.

    ![Create new branch from](images/onboarding_task/branching/cnbf.png)

3.  Enter a branch name which should follow convention `<your-last-name>/<branch-name>`, where branch name should be something clear and simple.

## Task: Creating messages and modules

You should see the `Ping` module already implemented in `NUbots/module/onboarding`.

Currently, this code **will not compile** because a `Pong` message doesn't exist, so let's create it.

1. Navigate to `NUbots/shared/message/onboarding`, duplicate `Ping.proto` and rename it and its contents to `Pong`.

   You should have a new file `Pong.proto` in folder `NUbots/shared/message/onboarding` with contents:

   ```protobuf
   syntax = "proto3";

   package message.onboarding;

>    message Pong{

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   message Pong {
```

   }
   ```

2. Ensure that the code now compiles by running:

   ```bash
   ./b configure --clean
   ./b build

>    ```

Reviewer: Might be good to talk about `-i` and turning off other roles, some of the new peeps have slow laptops and struggled to build during the first recruitment task

           using message::onboarding::Ping;
           using message::onboarding::Pong;

           on<Configuration>("Pong.yaml").then([this](const Configuration& config) {
               // Use configuration here from file Pong.yaml
               this->log_level = config["log_level"].as<NUClear::LogLevel>();
           });

           on<Startup>().then([this] {
               // Start the ping pong chain
               auto pong_msg = std::make_unique<Pong>();
               emit(pong_msg);
           });

           on<Trigger<Ping>>().then([this](const Ping& ping_msg) {
               // TODO: Log a INFO level message with the text "Pong"

               // TODO: Emit a Pong message
           });
       }

   }  // namespace module::onboarding
   ```

5. Add this module to the role file `onboarding.role` located in folder `NUbots/roles/test`. Its contents should then look like:

   ```make
   nuclear_role(
   # FileWatcher, ConsoleLogHandler and Signal Catcher Must Go First. KinematicsConfiguration usually goes after these
   # and without it many roles do not run
   extension::FileWatcher

>    # support::SignalCatcher

Reviewer: maybe it's not worth the change but signal catcher should be uncommented

    Ping::Ping(std::unique_ptr<NUClear::Environment> environment) : Reactor(std::move(environment)) {

        using message::onboarding::Ping;
        using message::onboarding::Pong;

        on<Configuration>("Ping.yaml").then([this](const Configuration& config) {
            // Use configuration here from file Ping.yaml
            this->log_level = config["log_level"].as<NUClear::LogLevel>();
        });

        on<Trigger<Pong>>().then([this](const Pong& pong_msg) {
            auto ping_msg = std::make_unique<Ping>();
            ping->count = ????; // TODO: Assign counter value.
            log<NUClear::INFO>("Ping");
            emit(ping_msg);
        });
    }

}  // namespace module::onboarding
```

## Task: Create a pull request

This section contains information about how to open a pull request. First, create your branch and name it. It should be in the format of `author(s)/this-code-does-this`. It is ideal to keep it intuitive and simple. Run `git checkout montano/onboarding` to push to this branch before doing anything else. Follow the images below to create a pull request that pushes to the `montano/onboarding` branch in `NUbots/NUbots`.

> 1. Checkout to the branch that you have created (the one created from `montano/onboarding`). Once in the branch, click the cloud with an arrow pointing up on the bottom left hand side of VS code. If you hover over it, you should be able to see "Publish Branch". Click on it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Checkout to the branch that you have created (the one created from `montano/onboarding`). Once in the branch, click the cloud with an arrow pointing up on the bottom left hand side of VS Code. If you hover over it, you should be able to see "Publish Branch". Click on it.
```

   ![Publish Branch](images/onboarding_task/pull_request/publish.png)

<Alert type='warn'>

> If you were not able to publish your branch successfully, then your write access will need to be given to you by an admin (usually the team leader).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you were not able to publish your branch successfully, then your write access will need to be given to you by an admin (usually the team leader). Please send a direct message on Slack if this is during recruitment.
```

</Alert>

2. Go to the page for the `NUbots/NUbots` repository. A popup with a "Compare and Pull request" button should be visible after successful publishing. Click on it.

   ![Compare and Pull Request](images/onboarding_task/pull_request/cpr.png)

> 3. Fill in the details to create a pulll request.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Fill in the details to create a pull request.
```

   - Assign a proper name to your pull request. It should be informative and describe exactly what the code aims to do.
   - Add a description to provide more detailed information about the feature.
   - You may assign people to review your code. When contributing to the code base, it is usually ideal to assign your mentors or someone with experience in related features as a reviewer.

   ![Create Pull Request](images/onboarding_task/pull_request/fcpr.png)

> 4. Press the "Create Pull request" when ready. This pull request should now be visible in the pull requests tab in github if done successfully.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. Press the "Create Pull request" when ready. This pull request should now be visible in the pull requests tab in GitHub if done successfully.
```

- Use `./b module generate <absolute module path and name>` to generate your modules. A full path example could be something like `test/onboarding_task`.

- Use the NUClear role from the start for this task and a starting point. It looks like

  ```make
  nuclear_role(
  extension::FileWatcher
  support::logging::ConsoleLogHandler
  actuation::KinematicsConfiguration
  platform::${SUBCONTROLLER}::HardwareIO
  input::SensorFilter
  extension::Director
  actuation::Kinematics
  actuation::Servos
  onboarding::Ping
  onboarding::Pong
  onboarding::Judge
  )
  ```

- They say that naming things is one of the hardest tasks in software engineering. What should the names of your modules be? Should they still be Ping and Pong? Can you think of more suitable names? What about your the names of your messages, i.e., your `.proto` files?

- NUbook will have all the information you need, and then some. This task cannot explain NUClear in its full glory, but it should be enough to enable members to contribute to the code base as soon as possible. If you wish to know more, you must learn to read documentation and if you are still stuck, don't hesitate to ask questions.

<Alert type='info'>

> When in VS code, press <kbd>CTRL</kbd> + <kbd>Shift</kbd> + <kbd>F</kbd> to find code snippets. This is particularly useful if members want to know how a specific bit of code should be used or how it is implemented. This will be specifically useful when looking at where to put your files in. For example, proto messages should lie in `~/NUbots/shared/messages/...` and modules should lie within `~/NUbots/modules`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When in VS Code, press <kbd>CTRL</kbd> + <kbd>Shift</kbd> + <kbd>F</kbd> to find code snippets. This is particularly useful if members want to know how a specific bit of code should be used or how it is implemented. This will be specifically useful when looking at where to put your files in. For example, proto messages should lie in `shared/messages/...` and modules should lie within `modules`.
```
maybe not having absolute paths as people may not be cloning to their home folder
